# On lockdowns

Lockdowns were enforced in many countries from early 2020 in response to the
outbreak of Covid-19. At the beginning it was unclear how serious the pandemic
would be. Estimates of the infection death rate ranged from as low as 0.1% to
over 4%. In the United States, a stay at home movement emerged in order to
"flatten the curve". As with many things American, this idea spread throughout
the world quickly. China of course didn't need an American excuse to enforce
massive restrictions of movement on its population and enforced a draconian
lockdown in Wuhan.

Neither did autocracies like Zimbabwe. It is remarkable how such a dysfunctional
country nevertheless managed to implement lockdown with extraordinary
efficiency, at least for a while, according to people from that country I've
spoken to.

In democratic countries there was loud opposition to lockdowns from the onset,
although there was also much support. Lockdowns were debated vociferously in
newspapers, online sites and social media. This is as it should have been: those
several billion of us who live in free societies value our freedom of
movement. But we also value our lives. The trade-off between our governments
restricting our movement and reducing deaths from the pandemic was an extremely
difficult calculus to make. It's also impossible to restrict movement without
restricting economic activities and even access to health-care. So part of the
calculus was the detriments of the economic effects of lockdown and lives lost
due to people not getting the level of health-care that might have been expected
before early 2020.

Nearly two years later --- I write this in December 2021 --- there is still
little consensus on how to calculate whether the gains of lockdown outweighed
the losses. For one thing, there is no single conception of lockdown. Many
countries have multiple levels of lockdown and have implemented widely differing
measures. Also, there are seemingly impossible to calculate counter-factuals to consider:
if this had not been done, how many lives would instead have been saved?

But we do have some answers and we can make some comparisons and reach
conclusions, that may be useful for Covid going forward, and future epidemics.

With time lockdowns have understandably become increasingly unpopular. In many
places they have broken down almost completely. Vaccines against Covid have
dramatically changed the calculus too. Before the emergence of Covid variants
that reduce vaccine efficacy against infection, they gave people the confidence
to resume most of their pre-2020 activities. But even with the delta and omicron
mutants that bypass the antibody protection, the vaccines remain effective at
reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death, and so many more people have
been willing to risk infection.

# The Scandinavian experiment

The closest we have to a controlled experiment of the risks and benefits of
lockdown is Scandinavia. This is because Denmark and Norway implemented
lockdowns while Sweden hardly did. Now while the Scandinavian countries are
similar geographically, culturally and economically, their differences are
sufficient that a comparison between them hardly meets the standards of a modern
randomised controlled trial. There was certainly no randomisation, and the
extent that Sweden can be seen as a control will always be controversial.

With these caveats Sweden had ##X times the death rate of Denmark and
Norway. It's economy didn't fare that differently either. Beyond the Swedish
government's control were international restrictions on travel as well as
the choices made by many people concerned about becoming infected to reduce
their participation in economic activities.

But the debate about whether Sweden's approach was the correct one depends as
much, if not more, on what one values than on an analysis of factual
outcomes. At the heart the matter are two questions.

First, how many lives is it worth saving to justify temporary but severe
restrictions on movement? Let's take the statistics at face-value and assume
that Sweden could have had the same death-rate as Denmark and Norway if it had
implemented a strict lockdown. This translates to roughly #XX deaths prevented
in a country of 11 million people.

Opponents of lockdown need to be at peace that this death toll is a reasonable
price to pay for maintenance of full freedoms.  This is not an obviously callous
or immoral calculation. Every year we accept a certain number of seasonal
influenza deaths at the height of winter, albeit a much smaller number in
virtually any country than Covid deaths of 2020-2021, and we do not implement
lockdowns to prevent these deaths, nor do any reasonable people, to my
knowledge, advocate for such lockdowns. So many supporters of Covid-19 lockdowns
are also implicitly making a calculation of an acceptable death toll.

In March 2020, I considered how many Covid deaths prevented made lockdown a justifiable
calculus in South Africa. There is no apparent objective means of making such a
calculation though; I might say several tens of thousands, another person
several thousands, and yet another several hundreds of thousands. Moreover there
was no way at that time to confidently predict how many deaths lockdowns would
prevent; even with hindsight any estimate might be disputed by reasonable people.

Second, is there a duty for the entire population to make sacrifices to reduce
the strain on health systems that became unable to cope at the peak of Covid
waves? Health workers found themselves overwhelmed, and at much greater risk of
Covid than the general population, as high care and intensive care units filled
up. The argument goes that lockdown, with its effect of flattening the curve and
reducing the number of hospitalisations, is a small price to pay by the general
population to alleviate the burden on health workers and hospitals.

# Vaccinations

The swift development of vaccines against Covid reduced both the need and
support for lockdowns. Britain is an instructive example. The Johnson government
was criticised for its slow response to the pandemic in early 2020 and its brief
flirtation with "herd immunity". This was the idea that the epidemic should run
its course unhindered so that it would more quickly come to an end when enough
people, once infected with SARS-CoV-2, immune to further infection. This
resulted in the UK having the highest number of deaths in Western
Europe. Eventually a strict lockdown was implemented.

Then with the rollout of the AstraZeneca vaccine, followed shortly after by the
Pfizer mRNA one, the picture changed again. The Johnson government took a risk
and ended restrictions in mid-2021, once a large portion of the population had
been vaccinated. The gamble appears to have paid off as the graph below
shows. Covid deaths, while far from negligible, have not since attained the
horrendous levels of 2020.

![Graph of daily Covid deaths in UK, via Worldometer ](UKCovidDeaths.jpg "Graph
of UK Covid deaths")

# The South African lockdowns

# Future contagions
